# Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)

## Introduction

- Amazon EC2 stands for Elastic Compute Cloud. It is the fundamental service within the Amazon Web Services that provides on demand, scalable, secure and virutalized computing capacity (esentially vitual servers) in the cloud.

- EC2 enables users to run applications without the need of the up front hardware investments,allowing for rapid scaling of compute resources within minutes rather than hours or days.

- If you breakdown the name EC2, then we have three words. Those are 

  **Elastic** : Elastic refers to the ability to automatically scale the computing resources such as increasing or decreasing the no of servers based on demand, traffic or workload requirements.

  **Compute** : Compute provides the computing power (CPU), Memory (RAM), Storage and networking capacity to run applications.

  **Cloud** : Cloud tells that all these virtual servers are hosted in Amazon global data centers allowing access across all over the world.

- So overall, EC2 allows users to rent virtual machines that acts as servers. These servers can be configured to host websites, run applications, process data or support backend databases. The Core functionalities of EC2 is :

  **Virutal Servers** : Users can launch virtual machines running different operating systems such as linux, windows or mac os

  **Complete Control** : Users can have complete adminstrative access over the instances so that they can install any software , configure networking and manage security settings.

  **Auto Scaling** : EC2 can automatically add or remove instances to match traffic ensuring high availability and cost efficiency.

  **Flexible Storage** : EC2 integrates with EBS (Elastic Block Storage) for persistent, high performance storage which acts as an virtual hard drives for the instances.

  **Security** : EC2 provides security groups to act as virtual firewalls by restricting the incoming and outgoing traffic.

## Configuring the EC2 Instance

- To Create an EC2 instance first we need to search for EC2 in the console and then we need to click on Launch instance button under instance section. Once you click on launch instance button, it prompt you to ask the following things.

- At first, you have to name the instance. Once you names that instance then it will ask you to select the AMI.

- AMI stands for Amazon Machine Image which is an image that provides software such as Operating System, Application Software, and storage settings required to setup and boot an EC2 instance. Once you selected the required AMI for your instance then it asked you to select the type of instance you willing to have.

- Instance Type actually provides you the computing power required to run your application which means it provide the CPU and Memory for you server.

- After selecting the type of instance required to run your application, then we have to create a key pair which is required to access this EC2 instance through command line. Since AWS doesn't provide any graphical interface for that instance, so we need to access that server via command line interface only. So inorder access the server via command line we need the key pairs to login to that instance. We have two type of key pairs there. Once is for putty and other is for SSH. Putty is used for windows version lessthan or equal to 8. If your windows version is more than 8 then it recommended to use SSH.

- Once we have created the key pairs, now we need to configure the network seetings. Network settings include setting up Network Inteface Card which we actually need to access this EC2 instance via internet and then setting up the firewalls which actually controls the incoming and outgoing traffic. By default AWS provides a virtual network interface card provides a way to the EC2 instance to access the internet. To configure the firewall setting, we need to create a security group and add the rules that controls incoming and outgoing traffic and then we have to acctach that security group to these instance.

- Once we configured network settings, now we have to configure the storage for this EC2 instance. This storage acts as an virtual hard drive to this EC2 instance. AWS provides different types of storages such as EBS, EFS, and EC2 instance storage etc.

- Once we have configured all these settings, we have one more thing to configure which is EC2 UserData which is optional. EC2 User Data is used to bootstrap our EC2 instances. Bootstrapping means launching command when machine starts. That script runs only once at the instance first start. EC2 User Data is used to automate the boot tasks such as Installing Updates, Softwares, Downloading common files from internet, etc. But EC2 User Data runs with root user of the instance.

## EC2 Instance Types

- AWS offers different types of EC2  instances that are optimized for different use cases. Each instances offers unique combinations of compute, memory and storage to power your specific workload needs. The major types of EC2 instances are General Purpose, Compute Optimized, Memory Optimized, Storage Optimized, Accelerated Computing and HPC Optimized.

- Before going to know in detail about these instances, let see the naming comvention of AWS EC2 instances. For example comsider this instance i.e `m5.2xlarge`. Here `m` tells us the instance class. `5` tells us the generation of that instance (as AWS imporves them over the time). `2xlarge` indicates the size of the instance. The size of instance starts from small and goes upto xlarge, 2xlarge and so on. As instance size increase computing resources such as CPU, Memory, Storage and Networking resources increases.

- **General Purpose Instances** : General purpose Instances provides a good balance of Compute, memory and netorking resources and can be used for for many workloads. These instances are good for many applications such as web servers, code repositories and small to medium databases. Most common instances in these class are T class instances such as t2.micro, t3.micro, M8g and so on.

- **Compute Optimized Instances** : Compute Optimized Instances are ideal for Compute bound applications that benifit from high performance processors. Some example workloads for compute instances are batch processing, media transcoding and dedicated gaming servers. Most common instances of these type are C class such as c6gn, c6g, c5, c5a, c5n etc. 

- **Memory Optimized Instances** : Memory Optimized Instances are designed to deliver fast performances for workloads that process large datasets in memory. For example these instances are good for High performance relational / non relational databases, Distributed Web scale cache stores, In-memory databases optimized for Businees intelligence, applications performing real time processing of big unstructured data. Most common instances of these type are r6g, r5, r5a  and x class instances

- **Storage Optimized Instances** : Storage Optimized Instances deliver millions of low latency, random I/O operations per second to applications. These are designed for workloads that require high sequential read and write access to large datasets in local storage. For example these instances are good for high frequency online transaction processing systems (OLTP), Relational & NoSQL databases, Data Warehouse Applications, Distributed File Systems Cache for in memory databases auch as Redis etc. Most common instances of these type are I8g, I8ge, I7i etc.

- **Accelerated Computing** : Accelerated Computing Instances use hardware accelerators or co processors to perform functions more efficiently. For example they can perform floating point number calculations, graphics processing, or data pattern matching. Some instances of these type are P6e instance etc. 

- **HPC Optimized Instances** : High performace computing instances offer best price performance for running HPC workloads at scale. HPC instances are ideal for applications that benifit from high-performance processors such as complex simulations, deep learning, and visual effects rendering. Example for these instances are Hpc8a etc.

## Security Groups 

- Security Groups are the fundamental of network security in AWS. They actually acts as virtual firewalls to AWS EC2 instances that controls incoming and outgoing traffic. Security groups contain inbound rules which controls all the incoming traffic. Security group has oubound rules which actually contolls all ougoing traffic. But by default an instance has access to any thing in the internet. So by defualt the destination for outbound rules is all.

- While creating inbound rules, we majorly configure two things. One is ports and other one is authorized IP addresses such as IPv4 or IPv6. Some of the classic ports are `22` - Used for SSH(Secure Shell) i.e used to login linux instance, `21` - FTP (File Tranfer Protocol) i.e used for uploading files into file share, `22` - SFTP (Secure File Tranfer Protocol) i.e used to upload file using SSH, `80` - HTTP (Hyper Text Transfer Protocol) i.e used to access unsecured websites, `443` - HTTPS (Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure) i.e used to access secured websites, `3389` - RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol) i.e used to login to the windows instances. So once we configure the port and IP address then the instance having configured IP can access the instances that is attached to this security group via configured port.

- As we know security groups rules can be referenced by IP or anothor security group. If two EC2 instances in the AWS wants to communicate then we usually configure inbound rules such that they are referenced by other security groups instead of IPs. This is because IP's of EC2 instances changes when you stop and re-start an instance. 

- Some good things we know about security groups are :

  1. Security Groups can be attached to multiple instances. They are locked down to a region / VPC combination. They actually live outside of EC2, so if traffic is blocked then EC2 instance won't see it.

  2. Its good to maintain one seperate security group for SSH access. If your application is not accessible (time out), then its security group issue. If your application gives a connection refused error then its application error or its not launched which ports might be closed or applications are not running on those ports.

  3. All inbound traffic is blocked by default and all outbound traffic is authorized by default.

## Connecting EC2 instance using SSH

- SSH stands for Secure Shell. SSH is a network protocol + software that lets you securely connect to anothor computer over a network (like the internet) and run commands remotely, transfer files and manage servers. Its basically like logging into anothor machine's terminal but encrypted and safe.

- Before SSH, remote access tools were not secure at all. The biggest problem in them are Data (including usernames & passwords) was sent as plain text. Anyone intercepting network traffic could read them. So SSH was created to encrypt the information, protect aganist man in the middle attacks,
provide secure authenitcation etc.

- Tools used for remote access before SSH are Telnet, FTP (File Tranfer Protocol), rlogin/rsh (remote shell). SSH doesn't replaced all these tools. It just solved security over intrusted internet which means it just added an additional security layer to it.

- So to connect to anothor computer terminal, anothor computer must enable or install and enable the sshd service. SSH is actually client and sshd is daemon which means client actually request for something and daemon actually process that request and respond accordingly. So if you want to connect to anothor computer, then sshd service must be enabled in the other computer. Then we need to .pem key which is actually like password. Then we need IP address of the other computer. Once sshd service is enabled in other computer and we get these details, then we can connect to that computer using SSH command. (This sshd is a service that actually lives (or runs) on port 22)

- So to connect to other computer, we have to run the following command :

  `ssh -i <path to .pem file> <username>@<Ipaddress>`

- For example if you want to connect to an ec2 instance then the command would be :

  `ssh -i ./EC2Tutorial.pem ec2-user@18.117.134.124`

- If SSH is not working properly in your computer then we have an alternative to connect to the EC2 instance which is EC2 Instance Connect. EC2 instance connect acutally uses temporary SSH key in behind the scenes and opens the anothor computer terminal in the browser. You just have to click connect button in the intances section then it shows EC2 instance connect option and select connect with public key then AWS opens a terminal by connecting to the EC2 instance with a temporary SSH key.

- **Note** :  If you want EC2 instance to do any task on behalf of yourself then attach an IAM role to this EC2 instance by giving appropriate permissions to this role. Suppose ig you want to list iam user then we have to conigure the aws cli first by using aws configure. To do this we have to provide the Access Key and Secret Access Key ID. But if you configure this in EC2, then other users in that organization might retrieve those keys by just connecting to that instance. So instead of doing this just acctach an IAM role which has IAMreadonly permission to this EC2 instance and run `aws iam list-users` which automatically lists the users in the organization. This is why we usually use IAM roles.

## EC2 Instance Purchasing Options

- AWS offers different purchasing option for customers while buying the EC2 instances. Those are On Demand, Reserved Instances, Savings Plan, Dedicated Instances, Dedicated Host etc.

- **On Demand Instances** : In On Demand purchasing, we can lanuch or terminate our instances whenever we want. But we have to pay what we use. For linux or windows, aws bills per second after first minitue for usage. For all other operating systems it bills per hour. On Demand EC2 instanc ehas highest cost but no upfront payment. In these type of purchase, we doesn't have longer commitment. We can terminate the instance whenever we want and we can relaunch the instance if we require it. These type of instances are recommended for shot-term and uninterrupted workloads where you can't predict how the application will behave.

- **EC2 Reserved Instances** : In these type of purchasing, we reserve specific instance attributes such as Instance Type, Region, Tenancy (it tells whether hardware is shared or dedicated), OS  for 1 to 3 years. Here we might more discounts (may be more than 70%) when compared to On Demand. If you reserver for more number of years the discounts would be higher. The discounts meight vary based on payment type you choose. If you paid All upfront the discount could be higher. If you chose partial, it would be little lower or if you choose no front, discounts would be very little. The scope these instances could be restricted to zone (AZ) or region. Once you reserve an instance then you cannot chage its attributes like instance type, OS, tenancy etc. It is recommended for steady state usage applications like databases. You can buy and sell these reserved instances in the Reserved Instance Marketplace.

  **Note** : If you want to upgrade your reserved instances in furture, then its better to choode convertible reserved instance option where you have flexibility to change the instance type such as OS, instance type, instance family, OS, Scope, and tenancy. But it would have lesser discounts than reserved instances.

- **EC2 Savings Plan** : EC2 savings plan is similar to reserved instance. Here also you will commit for long term usage but you don't reserve the instance. Instead you commit to a certain tyoe of usage such as i will use $10 per hour for 1 to 3 years etc. So instead of reserving instance, you are just committing towards an usage. Usage beyond the EC2 savings plan is billed at the On-Demand price. But in this purchase option, you are locked to specific instance family & AWS Region (m5 in us-east-1). But you flexibility across instance size (e.g m5.xlarge, m5.2xlarge etc.), OS (e.g Linux, Windows), tenancy (Host, Dedicated, Default). In EC2 savings plan also you will gets almost similar discounts as reserved instances. 

  **Ex** : Consider you are using M5 instance for your application. Suppose you choose to use $10 per hour with discount of 70%. Suppose the cost of M5 instance per hour is $1. Now you launched multiple M5 instances. So AWS first calculates On demand price for your usage in an hour. Suppose if the on demand price is $25.So actually you need to pay $25 dollars to AWS for this usage. Since you are in savings plan for $10 usage per hour, you will get that 70% dicount for first $10. So discounted rate is 10*0.3 = $3. So instead of paying complete $10, you will pay just $3 dollars. Now we have some remaining amount which is $15. So total $15 + $3 = $18. So you have to pay $18 dollars to AWS instead of $25 dollas. So formula is (Commited Usage * Discounted price + remaining balance). Suppose your on demand usage for an hour is just $10, then you jsut have to pay 10 * 0.3 + 0 = $3. If your on demand usage is just 6 dollars then you have to pay 6 * 0.3 + 0 = $1.8. This is how savings plan works. 

  **Note** : EC2 savings plan is far better than reserved instances as savings plan has flexibilty in changing the instances, instance types, size, os, tenancy, zones etc.

- **EC2 Spot Instances** : EC2 spot instances are most cost effective instances in AWS where you actually get AWS's spare capacity at a discount. Here you simply request for a spot instance at that stage spot market price. These spot instances might be terminated by AWS with a two minute warning if the capacity is need for other customers or On Demand Instances. So here you simply request for spot instance by setting the maximum price. If the spot price rises above your maximum price, your instance will be terminated. If you want the same instance then you have to wait unit the max set price equals to current spot price or else you can request new spot instance with anothor max price, but only pay the current spot market price, not your maximum price set by you.Spot prices are dynamic and changes based on the supply of unused EC2 capacity and demand in that region and availability zone. You pay the current spot price per hour and your instance can be interrupted with 2 minute notice if AWS needs that capacity. These instances are useful for workloads that are resilient to failure such as Batch Jobs, Data Analysis, Image Processing, Any distributed workloads or workloads with flexible start and end time.

- **EC2 Dedicated Hosts** : AWS Provides dedicated hosts for organizations who actually need a dedicated server for thier own use which means AWS provided an isolated server which was nerver shared with any other customer or oranization. In this purchasing option, organization has full control over the infrastructure which they can any OS or any applications on that infrastructure. AWS has no control over it. Aws just charges for this and  they don't have any authority on that infra until that period. If you want you can use AWS softwares, sockets and network cards or else you can use you own sockets, network cards and OS which might decrease the price also. In EC2 Dedicated hosts, AWS has two pricing options. Those are On-Demand where we actually pay per second for active dedicated host and reserved - 1 to 3 years (No upfront, partial upfront, All upfront). EC2 Dedicated hosts are the most expensive option. This purchasing option is useful when the software has complicated licensing model i.e bring your own license (BYOL)  or companies have strong regulatory or compliance needs.

- **EC2 Dedicated Instances** : In EC2 dedicated instances, we might get isolated hardware to run our instance which means the hardware undelying the virtual machine is not shared by any other customer. But this hardware is shared by other instances in same account. But we won't have contol over the instance placement which means our instance doesn't live in single server until we use it. AWS actually changes the placement of our instances to other server for every start/stop of instance but it gurantees that underlying hardware is not shared by any other customer. So AWS has control over instance placement. It changes the placement of instance to optimize the capacity usage and maintain the system health etc.

- **EC2 Capacity Reservations** : Capacity Reservations are used when you need guaranteed capacity in a specific AZ. You pay On-Demand pricing for the reserved capacity, with the key difference that charges continue even if instances are stopped. Canceling the reservation stops future charges. It doesn't have the time commitment (create/cancel anytime) and no billing discounts. So in these purchasing option you always have access to EC2 capacity when you need it. These are suitable for short term, uniterrupted workloads that needs to be in a specific AZ.  

- **Summary**  AWS EC2 offers multiple purchasing options to balance cost, flexibility, and capacity guarantees, and usage for all types is billed hourly based on the standard On-Demand price (with discounts applied for RIs, Savings Plans, or Spot). On-Demand Instances let you launch and terminate instances anytime with no long-term commitment, at the highest cost. Reserved Instances (RI) provide significant discounts (up to ~70%) when you commit to specific instance attributes for 1–3 years, with limited flexibility unless using Convertible RIs. Savings Plans are similar but more flexible: you commit to a dollar-per-hour usage instead of a specific instance, allowing changes in size, OS, tenancy, and sometimes family, while applying discounts to your committed usage. Spot Instances use AWS’s spare capacity at the lowest cost but can be interrupted with two minutes’ notice, making them ideal for fault-tolerant workloads. Dedicated Hosts give full control over a physical server for compliance or BYOL licensing, while Dedicated Instances run on isolated hardware but AWS controls placement. Finally, Capacity Reservations guarantee capacity in a specific AZ, billed at On-Demand rates even if instances are stopped, and can be canceled anytime, providing guaranteed availability without long-term commitment. 

- **Note** : We have remember that if you don't pay full or pratial upfront, then AWS bills it hourly based on on demand rate for that usage. It will give discounts on on demand rate hourly based on the type of purchasing you have chosen.

## Spot and Spot Fleet Instances

- Spot instance is an instance that uses spare EC2 capacity that is available for less than on-demand price. Because spot instances enable you to request unused EC2 instances at steep discounts, you can lower your amazon EC2 costs significantly. The hourly price of spot instance is called spot price.  The Spot price of each instance type in each Availability Zone is set by Amazon EC2, and is adjusted gradually based on the long-term supply of and demand for Spot Instances. Your Spot Instance runs whenever capacity is available.

- For this first we need to set the max price we want to pay for that instance. And then we have to select the type of request for this instance. There are actually 2 types of requests. One is one-time request and anothor one is persistent request. One-time request usually ends once spot instance is launched. Once it is launched that request got ended. If AWS interrupts this instance because of spot price increase or some other reason, this spot instance might be terminated if the default interruption behaviour is termination or else it would be in stop state. If it is in stop state, aws doesn't relaunch this isntance as request is ended. If you want you can relaunch that instance if AWS permits. Second type of request is persistent. Suppose you requested for 3 spot instances with persistent type. Intially AWS launches these 3 instances from its pool of instance types and availabilty zones. If AWS interrupts any instances, then this persistent request tries to find the replacement instance to maintian the target capacity. This request will do the same thing until it expires or you cancel the request. Eventhough you cancel the request, the instances will be in running state until AWS interrupts them . If you want to terminate them once you cancel the request then you have to manually terminate them.

- Spot Fleet Requests are generally used to launch multiple spot instances at single glance. Whenever you required to launch multiple spot instances then you have to request for spot fleet first and then you have to select how many instances you want and  then you have to set the maximum cost for your spot instances if you want to go in budget and then you can select the maintain target capacity which automatically replace then interrupted spot instances with new instances available in the pool. Once we have configured target capacity then we can configure instance type requirements where we can select no of vCPUs and memory. Then AWS shows available instance types across selected AZ which decides no of pools available for us. Once we configured target capacity and  instance type requriements then we have to select allocation strategies. Allocation strategies determines which of the available pools to request spot instances from.   

- <b>Lowest Price</b> strategy selects spot instances from the pool with lowest price (cost optimization, short workload). <b>Diversified</b> strategy select spot instances across all the pools which are great for availabilty and long workloads. <b>Capacity Optimized</b> selects spot instances from the pool with optimal capacity for the number of instances. <b>Price Capacity Optimized</b> strategy selects spot instances from the pools with highest capacity available, then select the pool with lowest price (best choice for most of the workloads).

- Once you created your spot fleet requests, aws launches the target capacity and even aws interrupts any instance then fleet request automatically find the replacement and maintain the target capacity. If you to terminate the instances then just cancel the spot fleet request and instances are automatically terminated if interruption behaviour is termination. Otherwise we have to manually terminate the instances.